Articulos MoMA
* The Anarchist and His Friends: Félix Fénéon through the Artists He Championed
Without Fénéon, we might not know artists like Georges
Seurat, Paul Signac, and Henri Matisse as we do today.
Apr 15, 2020
Félix Fénéon (1861–1944) was an art critic, journalist, publisher, editor, collector, and anarchist. He championed some of history’s most beloved artists before they became well known, including Georges Seurat, Paul Signac, Pierre Bonnard, Henri Matisse, and Amedeo Modigliani. He became particularly close with Seurat, Signac, and Matisse and coined the term Neo-Impressionism to describe Seurat’s and Signac’s novel use of bright contrasting colors, and pointillism, a dot-by-dot technique, they used to build their landscapes, portraits, and, occasionally, visions of an anarchist utopia. Just as the vivid touches of paint in these works came together to form a cohesive image, so, too, did Fénéon and these artists unify as intellectual partners and close friends to change art history forever.
We spoke with the curators of the exhibition, versions of which were on view in France before traveling to MoMA, where the exhibition was scheduled to open in March. While the Museum is closed, we would like to introduce the exhibition to you online through our Virtual Views series.
Below, Starr Figura, curator in MoMA’s Department of Drawings and Prints; Isabelle Cahn, senior curator at Musée d’Orsay; and Philippe Peltier, former head of the Océania and Insulindia Unit at Musée du quai Branly-Jacques Chirac, discuss why Fénéon is a name we need to know today, and what he spotted in these pioneering young artists.
Starr Figura: The period of the late 19th century in Paris is called the Belle Époque; it was a time that’s often celebrated because of extraordinary cultural achievements and rapid modernization that transformed people’s lives. If you were rich, it transformed your life for the better. There was electric light, modern transportation, and an exciting new print culture since paper and printing were cheap for the first time. There were thousands of little journals and newspapers that people could read to be informed about the world and connect with each other [and which fed] all kinds of developments in art, culture, and literature.
But it was also a time of incredible economic and social hardship for people at the other end of the socioeconomic spectrum. There was terrible poverty and the working class wasn’t able to unionize, collect a minimum wage, or have a voice in their futures.
Paul Signac created In the Time of Harmony: The Golden Age Has Not Passed, It Is Still to Come (1896) as a manifesto for the anarchist ideal of a beautiful golden age that would emerge once the anarchists succeeded in overturning the social and political status quo and creating a new Arcadian world. It’s a totally idealistic vision of workers and families living and enjoying a leisurely, beautiful life in the future. It was actually originally titled In the Time of Anarchy, but Signac changed the title due to all the political unrest of the 1890s.
In keeping with his anarchist ideals and his desire to help the underprivileged in society, Fénéon was extremely generous. He would give away money and even small artworks to friends and visitors. His generosity was also reflected in the way he devoted his entire life to supporting and promoting the artists that he believed in.
In the 20th century, he became an art dealer. While it was surprising to many of his anarchist friends that he would join the commercial side of the art world, it was another way he could support artists that he believed in. He gave Signac a contract with the Galerie Bernheim-Jeune and he gave Henri Matisse his first contract, in 1907.
Matisse met Fénéon in 1904. They were both visiting Signac, who had a house in the South of France. Fénéon was perhaps the only dealer that Matisse ever trusted, and the relationship between Signac and Matisse and Fénéon was critical for the development of modernism.
Looking back, it’s hard to imagine that Matisse would have had the same career trajectory if it were not for Fénéon providing financial security and support—allowing Matisse the creative freedom to push his art, and the avant-garde, in new directions.
When we look at Matisse’s paintings in this show, there are some from the initial moment, in 1905–06, when he broke through in a Fauvist style, which was based on incredibly vibrant, pure color, and wild gestures of the paint brush. At the time it was controversial, but it was a revolutionary beginning to the story of modern art. It was also a continuation of the emphasis on color and the juxtaposition of pure colors that we saw in Neo-Impressionism.
Philippe Peltier: Fénéon discovered Georges Seurat’s paintings in 1884 and he was shocked. It was the beginning of pointillism and for Fénéon, it was really a revolution in art.
Seurat was not very well known and died young, and his family was not interested in his paintings—they didn’t like their revolutionary quality. If not for Fénéon, Seurat would have been forgotten.
Fénéon was not only supporting Seurat by producing publications and catalogues raisonnes, which is quite important, but also by sustaining his market by purchasing Seurat pieces. He did all of this because he considered Seurat’s paintings incredibly important to the history of art.
Paul Signac. Opus 217. Against the Enamel of a Background Rhythmic with Beats and Angles, Tones, and Tints, Portrait of M. Félix Fénéon in 1890. 1890
Isabelle Cahn: Fénéon was very particular. He believed museums were not involved in modern art, and he was alone in defending Seurat. He explained that the French museums were cemeteries, and he didn’t want his collection to end up in such places.
The paintings by the Neo-Impressionists are a little bit paradoxical because these painters were anarchists, but they painted with small dots of colors, something very slow and methodical. This calculated process is curious for people with a very strong ideology based on freedom, and improvisation, or spontaneity.
The portrait of Fénéon by Signac is a Neo-Impressionist manifesto. All the colors create a likeness, but behind the man is this beautiful fan with colors. There are shades of Japan, because this selection of colors was culled from a book of Japanese patterns and kimono design that belonged to Signac. Bright colors are not realistic. They mean something higher than reality, and this higher reality is hope, is joy—it’s optimism. Bright colors helped to build a new world, a world of harmony, a world of abstraction from reality.
Georges-Pierre Seurat. The Channel at Gravelines, Evening. 1890
In this exhibition we have several of Seurat’s paintings, which are rare and very fragile. The seascapes are particularly special. He painted the sea in the north of France: It is a cold sea, and the colors are gray and delicate. But there is something very quiet in his landscapes, especially because the light is wonderful. You can guess the time of the day when it was painted, and it is as if the world stops. The works create a kind of transcendence when you look at them carefully.
The emotive power is also very strong in Signac’s Setting Sun. Sardine Fishing. Adagio. Opus 221 (1891), which depicts sunset. The sun is at the same level of the horizon and the light dances on the surface of the sea. The light is very intense, and only lasts for one or two seconds in the day. The painting itself sometimes looks like something mechanical, because of these small dots side by side, but the complete atmosphere is very poetic.
Paul Signac. Setting Sun. Sardine Fishing. Adagio. Opus 221 from the series The Sea, The Boats, Concarneau. 1891
Fénéon was fascinated by the scientific method of the Neo-Impressionists. Each color has a special role, and when they are together they interact in a special way. The artists read theory and books written by scientists to know how colors interacted together. Fénéon read books by Charles Henry, Ogden Rood, and others, and also tried to understand and describe the paintings through these theories. The theories were a skeleton for the painting.
I think that they wanted to believe theory. They knew the reality of human nature, and the political climate, and all these tensions, but they wanted to create a kind of testimony to show how life could be beautiful.
These paintings are a part of our human experience. It’s not only work to admire, or to consider, or to describe. It is a physical experience and metaphysical experience. This is very apparent with the paintings that Fénéon liked and defended. With this exhibition we are lucky to be able to see them together, and see how they were all connected to a human experience.
Starr Figura: It’s a fascinating moment to look at Fénéon's life and career because of the way that he viewed avant-garde art and radical politics as two sides of the same coin that fed each other. The climate that he lived in is amazingly relevant today. It was a world where there was a huge gulf between the economically advantaged and disadvantaged, the access to power, the glorious benefits of new technology, and the social structures that inhibited people from fully participating in them.
These artists could help promote new ideas, new ways of envisioning the world, new ways of creating harmony. On the political side, it was also necessary to think about the state of the world requiring something new and different. That resonates today, as does the way a lot of artists feel about art helping to envision change.
—As told to Natasha Giliberti




* The First Studio Henri Matisse Invented Entirely for Himself
Read an exclusive Matisse: The Red Studio catalogue excerpt, about how
the artist came to work in the space where he made his iconic painting.
Ann Temkin, Dorthe Aagesen
Apr 27, 2022
Following your visit, we have the honor to inform you that we would be able to provide you with a demountable studio based on the adjacent drawing, namely: Dimensions 10 meters × 10 meters, axis to axis, of each post—floor raised by 0.15 meters—height of the walls 5 meters, shed-style roof, the long side about 8 meters, the glazed side 3.50.1
These are the first lines of a handwritten fabrication proposal sent to Henri Matisse on June 2, 1909, by the director of the Compagnie des Constructions Démontables et Hygiéniques in Paris. The two-page letter outlines the specifications for a freestanding studio to be erected on a parcel of land adjoining Matisse’s newly rented house in the town of Issy-les-Moulineaux, located along the Seine River barely four miles southwest of central Paris. The studio was to be simple in shape and large in size, a square about 33 feet in length and width, with walls 16 and a half feet high.2 Its “shed” roof of two slanted sides meeting at an off-center peak would be almost entirely windowed on the shorter side, allowing light from above to flood the interior.
Letter from Lucien Assire, Compagnie des Constructions
Démontables et Hygiéniques, to Henri Matisse, June 2, 1909
The new studio would be very different
from any of his previous ones.
Edward Steichen. Portrait of Matisse with “La Serpentine.” 1909
This studio would be the first workplace Matisse invented entirely for himself, following a decade spent making art in the proverbial garret, rooms claimed within small apartments, and adapted spaces in two former convents. Perhaps picturesque, those accommodations had been sorely lacking in other respects. Now, at age 39, Matisse had the chance to aim for pure functionality. The studio-fabrication proposal specified an iron framework and a roof of corrugated sheet metal; inside, it called for a wood ceiling, a red fir floor, and fir wall paneling. As the drawing on the first page of the letter makes clear, the panes on the roof would adjoin an equal span of tall glass panes on the contiguous wall; windows would thus define almost an entire side of the studio. On the opposite wall would be a six-and-a-half-foot-wide window and on another wall an equally wide double door, covered by an awning. The whole thing could be delivered and assembled by the builder two months hence.3
The new studio would be very different from any of his previous ones. During most of his early years in Paris, Matisse had lived and worked in cramped quarters at 19, quai Saint-Michel. In October 1905, he would finally rent a separate studio in the Couvent des Oiseaux at 86, rue de Sèvres. The old convent building belonged to the French state, which had reclaimed vast numbers of properties being used by the Catholic Church as a result of a series of secularization laws enacted during 1904–05. The government’s sale of the Couvent des Oiseaux necessitated Matisse’s move, in December 1907, to the nearby Couvent du Sacré Coeur at 33, boulevard des Invalides. This convent offered capacious living quarters (Matisse rented a suite of rooms including a vast parlor) as well as studios and, as of spring 1908, space for the art school he initially had established in the Couvent des Oiseaux. Matisse had set up the school at the request of two close friends: the German artist Hans Purrmann and the American art collector Sarah Stein (the wife of Michael Stein, the older brother of fellow expatriates and collectors Leo and Gertrude Stein). At the Couvent du Sacré-Coeur, Matisse divided one large space between his studio and his academy. The space is generally cited as the convent’s former refectory; Matisse later recalled it as “an old pavilion in the garden.”4 The academy quickly expanded into a mecca for international students, mainly from Germany, the United States, and Scandinavia.
Path to the Issy studio. Autochrome. Summer 1917
During the year and a half the Matisse family spent at the Couvent du Sacré-Coeur, their lifestyle was uniquely communal. The convent’s various buildings and large garden, though long abandoned and wildly overgrown, became a bustling center in which there was little or no dividing line between family, friends, and pupils, some of whom rented their own residences and studios in the complex. Purrmann, Matisse’s head of school, lived above him, as did the American painter Patrick Henry Bruce. The sculptor Auguste Rodin occupied the ground floor of what had been the convent’s school, the 18th-century Hôtel Biron (today the Musée Rodin). Rodin had been introduced to the building by another occupant, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, his friend and former secretary. An assortment of other artists, poets, musicians, and actors filled out the community, taking advantage of a rare opportunity for an unaffluent cohort to enjoy a distinguished address in the center of Paris, even if its indoor and outdoor spaces retained few traces of their former glory.5
The Matisses’ move from Paris to Issy-les-Moulineaux was prompted by the government’s decision to sell this convent, too, resulting in the delivery of an eviction notice to its occupants in early 1909. Matisse was by now accustomed to the spacious accommodations that the convent provided, as well as to its parklike setting. He knew that he needed to look beyond Paris if he wished to find an affordable equivalent, and by April he had located and decided on the property in the nearby town of Issy-les-Moulineaux.6 Its unique advantage was a double lot: one containing the house, and the other providing a site for a studio. The relocation brought Matisse to a small industrial town in which he was one of very few artists. The residential area was located high above the local factories and businesses and was still very lightly populated.
Interior of Matisse’s studio in Issyles-Moulineaux. October/November 1911
The artist’s move to Issy served to distance him from an
accumulating set of professional pressures and anxieties.
The new address in Issy freed Matisse from the constant company that was part of life at the Couvent du Sacré-Coeur. As it turned out, there was no immediate sale of the convent, and Matisse’s school continued on its premises during the 1909–10 academic year. But the artist greatly reduced his commitment, appearing only once a week to critique students’ work. Matisse’s self-enforced withdrawal reflected his recognition that he could no longer expend upon his classes the energies necessary for his own painting. Equally important, the artist’s move to Issy served to distance him from an accumulating set of professional pressures and anxieties apart from those of a teacher. On the brink of turning 40, Matisse was battling widespread disparagement of his work, despite the fervent admiration of his students and a small number of devoted collectors. Only four years earlier, he had risen to avant-garde fame as the leader of the notorious artists known as the Fauves (“wild beasts”), who had horrified the art world with their paintings’ free brushwork and vivid, nonnaturalistic colors. But in 1909 the Parisian art world was firmly in the grip of a then-nascent Cubism, pioneered by Pablo Picasso and Matisse’s former Fauve comrade Georges Braque. The move from Paris allowed Matisse to literalize his sense of having been relegated to a position no longer at the center of discussion. The commodious new studio in Issy would provide the setting for what was to be an independent and by no means easy course.
* Everything You Need to Know About Henri Matisse’s Cut-Outs
Watch, listen, and discover more about the
culminating innovation of a restlessly inventive artist.
Samantha Friedman
Dec 6, 2024
In our current installation Matisse’s Cut-Outs: A Celebration, 10 key works trace the arc of the artist’s last chapter, in which he invented an entirely new medium. Beginning in the 1940s, Henri Matisse used scissors to cut forms out of sheets of paper painted with colorful gouache, and with the help of assistants, pinned them in variable arrangements, which were later mounted. They began on an intimate scale, and eventually blossomed into independent creations that reached environmental proportions. Sometimes they helped Matisse design works in other mediums, such as a resplendent stained-glass window, now on view alongside its cut-out maquette; at other times they remained autonomous creations. Initially derided by one critic as “an agreeable distraction,” the cut-outs have come to captivate audiences with their invigorating color and surprising materiality.
At MoMA these works were first presented in 1951, when Matisse was just experimenting with the new form, and then 10 years later, in a 1961 show not long after the artist’s death. Many of them were reunited five decades later in the exhibition Henri Matisse: The Cut-Outs. For that major undertaking, we produced a website to highlight our research into seemingly simple but, in fact, pretty complex questions like: What is a cut-out? How and why did Matisse make them, and what did it mean when he did? How can we understand their two lives, first as contingent works on the artist’s walls, and then as objects framed up for display? How do they continue to change over time, and what might our conservators do about it?
We’ve gathered a host of resources here that we’ve made over the years. Videos, audio, art-making activities, and other features below pay tribute to, and grapple with, these beautiful, radical works that resonate as deeply today as they did when Matisse first, as he described it, “cut directly into vivid color.”
—Samantha Friedman, Curator, Department of Drawings and Prints